PROF-1057: Python doc for profiling (#6913)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/profiling/_index.md

[3]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/tools/solaris/java.html
[4]: /account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

> The Datadog Profiler requires Python 2.7 or above running on a linux OS. Memory profiling will only work on Python 3.5 and above. To begin profiling applications:

Author: Done

> 1. install `ddtrace`, which contains the both tracing and profiling class files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install `ddtrace`, which contains both tracing and profiling:
```

Author: Done

    ```shell
    pip install ddtrace
    ```

     **Note**: Profiling is available in the `ddtrace` library in versions above 0.35.

> 2. Add a valid [Datadog API key][2] in your environment variable: `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY`

Author: Done

> 3. To automatically profile your code, you can import the `ddtrace.profile.auto module`. As soon as it is imported, it will start catching CPU profiling information on your behalf:

Author: Done

    ```python
    import ddtrace.profile.auto
    ```

> 4. After a minute or two, visualize your profiles in the [Datadog APM > Profiling page][1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. After a minute or two, visualize your profiles on the [Datadog APM > Profiling page][1].
```

Reviewer: Why footnotes rather than links?

Author: Done

**Note**:

- If you want to control which part of your code should be profiled, you can use the `ddtrace.profiler.profiler` object:

    ```python
    import ddtrace.profile.profiler

    prof = profiler.Profiler()
    prof.start()

    # At shutdown
    prof.stop()

>     ```

Reviewer 2: "flat is better than nested" does not apply here.
I've created https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/browse/PROF-1208 to expose the `Profiler` object one level above.

We had the debate about "trace vs tracing" and "profile vs profiling" almost a year ago and I thought we were fixing those "profiling" to "profile" to be consistent?
I don't mind renaming, just let me know / create a JIRA task.

>     ```

Reviewer: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/browse/PROF-1218

>     ```

Reviewer: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/browse/PROF-1218

>     ```

Author: done

> - You can run your program with profiling enabled by using the wrapper pyddprofile. This will automatically enable the profiling of your application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Alternatively, you can profile your service by running it with  the wrapper `pyddprofile`:
```

    ```shell

>     $ pyddprofile myscript.py

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $ pyddprofile server.py
```

Author: Done

    ```

- For advanced setup of the profiler or to add tags like `service` or `version`, you can use environment variable to set those parameters:

| Environment variable                             | Type          | Description                                                                                      |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY`                           | String        | The [Datadog API key][2] to use when uploading events.                                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY`                           | String        | The [Datadog API key][2] to use when uploading profiles.                                           |
```

Author: Done

> | `DD_PROFILING_TAGS`                              | String        | The tags to apply to uploaded profile. Must be a list of in the `key1:value,key2:value2` format. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `DD_PROFILING_TAGS`                              | String        | The tags to apply to uploaded profiles, formatted like `key1:value1,key2:value2`. |
```

Author: Done

> | `DD_SERVICE_NAME` or `DATADOG_SERVICE_NAME`      | String        | Datadog API key.                                                                                 |

Reviewer: DATADOG_SERVICE_NAME is deprecated.

```suggestion
| `DD_SERVICE_NAME` | String        | Datadog API key.                                                                                 |
```

Author: Done

[3]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/tools/solaris/java.html
[4]: /account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

> The Datadog Profiler requires Python 2.7 or above running on Linux. Memory profiling will only work on Python 3.5 and above. To begin profiling applications:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Datadog Profiler requires Python 2.7+ running on Linux. Memory profiling only works on Python 3.5+. To begin profiling applications:
```

> 1. install `ddtrace` with the `profile` flavor, which contains both tracing and profiling:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Install `ddtrace` with the `profile` flavor, which contains both tracing and profiling:
```

    ```shell
    pip install ddtrace[profile]
    ```

>      **Note**: Profiling is available in the `ddtrace` library in versions above 0.35.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     **Note**: Profiling is available in the `ddtrace` library for versions 0.35+.
```

> 2. Add a valid [Datadog API key][2] in your environment variable: `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Add a valid [Datadog API key][2] in your environment variable: `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY`.
```

> 3. Set `env`, `service` and `version` as Datadog tags in your environment variables.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Set `env`, `service`, and `version` as Datadog tags in your environment variables.
```

    ```shell
    export DD_PROFILING_TAGS=env:<YOUR_ENVIRONMENT>,service:<YOUR_SERVICE>,version:<YOUR_VERSION>
    ```

> 4. To automatically profile your code, you can import `ddtrace.profile.auto`. As soon as it is imported, the profiler will start:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. To automatically profile your code, import `ddtrace.profile.auto`. After import, the profiler starts:
```

    ```python
    import ddtrace.profile.auto
    ```

5. After a minute or two, visualize your profiles on the [Datadog APM > Profiling page][1].

**Note**:

> - If you want to control which part of your code should be profiled, you can use the `ddtrace.profiler.profiler` object:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you want to control which part of your code should be profiled, use the `ddtrace.profiler.profiler` object:
```

> - If you want to control which part of your code should be profiled, you can use the `ddtrace.profiler.profiler` object:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If you want to control which part of your code should be profiled, you can use the `ddtrace.profiler.profiler.Profiler` object:
```
`ddtrace.profiler.profiler` is a module

Author: done

    ```python
    import ddtrace.profile.profiler

    prof = profiler.Profiler()

>     prof.start()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    from ddtrace.profile.profiler import Profiler

    prof = Profiler()
    prof.start()
```

    # At shutdown
    prof.stop()
    ```

> - Alternatively, you can profile your service by running it with  the wrapper `pyddprofile`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Alternatively, profile your service by running it with the wrapper `pyddprofile`:
```

    ```shell
    $ pyddprofile server.py
    ```

> - For advanced setup of the profiler or to add tags like `service` or `version`, you can use environment variable to set those parameters:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For advanced setup of the profiler or to add tags like `service` or `version`, use environment variables to set the parameters:
```

| Environment variable                             | Type          | Description                                                                                      |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY`                           | String        | The [Datadog API key][2] to use when uploading profiles.                                         |

> | `DD_PROFILING_TAGS`                              | String        | The tags to apply to uploaded profile. Must be a list of in the `key1:value1,key2:value2`.       |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `DD_PROFILING_TAGS`                              | String        | The tags to apply to an uploaded profile. Must be a list of in the format `<KEY1>:<VALUE1>,<KEY2>:<VALUE2>`.       |
```

Reviewer: Hugo, looks like there was also a bad edit here.

> | `DD_SERVICE_NAME`                                | String        | The Datadog [service][3] name. It can be set here, or in `DD_PROFILING_TAGS`.                    |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `DD_SERVICE_NAME`                                | String        | The Datadog [service][3] name, which can be set here, or in `DD_PROFILING_TAGS`.                    |
```

{{% tab "Python" %}}

The Datadog Profiler requires Python 2.7 or above running on Linux. Memory profiling will only work on Python 3.5 and above. To begin profiling applications:

1. install `ddtrace` with the `profile` flavor, which contains both tracing and profiling:

    ```shell
    pip install ddtrace[profile]
    ```

     **Note**: Profiling is available in the `ddtrace` library in versions above 0.35.

2. Add a valid [Datadog API key][2] in your environment variable: `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY`

3. Set `env`, `service` and `version` as Datadog tags in your environment variables.

    ```shell

>     export DD_PROFILING_TAGS=env:<YOUR_ENVIRONMENT>,service:<YOUR_SERVICE>,version:<YOUR_VERSION>

Reviewer: Just a heads up that as soon as we implement the new standard of DD_ENV, DD_SERVICE, DD_VERSION, we'll want to update this to use those.

Author: yes

| Socket I/O               | Shows the time each method spent handling socket I/O.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

Once enabled, the following profile types are collected:

| Profile type             | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | CPU         | Shows the time each method spent running on the CPU. It includes CPython bytecode, but not native code called from within Python.                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 2: Actually it does include native code. Did we write that somewhere else?
TBH I don't think we should use the word "native". It might refer to something in Java, but I never heard of it in the Python ecosystem.

Author: Corrected

Reviewer: Awesome! I was a bit surprised to see this :-)

| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CPU         | Shows the time each method spent running on the CPU. It includes CPython bytecode, but not native code called from within Python.                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each method, including allocations which were subsequently freed.                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | Wall | Shows the elapsed time each method spent. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Wall | Shows the elapsed time used by each method. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. |
```

@jd does this include native code? if so we should include that since it differs from CPU

Reviewer 2: Both always include "native" code.

> | Exceptions               | Shows the number of exceptions caught or uncaught for each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: @jd The method is where the exception was raised?

Reviewer 2: Yes.

| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | CPU         | Shows the time each method spent running on the CPU. It includes CPython bytecode, but not native code called from within Python.                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| CPU         | Shows the time each function spent running on the CPU. For example, this does not include time waiting for a file read to return.                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

Author: done

> | Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each method, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Only supported on Python 3.                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Only supported on Python 3.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
```

> | Wall | Shows the elapsed time used by each method. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Wall | Shows the elapsed time used by each function. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the function is running. |
```

> | Exceptions               | Shows the number of exceptions caught or uncaught for each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Exceptions               | Shows the number of caught or uncaught exceptions raised by each function.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
```

> | Lock                     | Shows the time each method spent waiting for a lock.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Lock                     | Shows the time each function spent waiting for a lock.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
```
